doing this at home will give you
phenomenal overall results with not so
much time investment and it's not so
difficult we're talking about a su total
of really yeah yeah doing that per week
will radically transform your body Dr
Michael Israel is a leading Sports
scientist who provides noons
science-based strategies on muscle
building fat loss and helping people
maximize their Fitness potential my
mission is to get everyone in as good of
shape as possible with minimum time
investment so where do we start so it's
the consistency that matters doesn't
matter if it's 2 hours a week or if it's
18 hours a week if you're consistent you
can get amazing benefits and then
there's specificity which is the most
important principle in all of exercise
science that's telling yourself okay I
want bigger biceps and then focus on
that and also every real working set
should be challenging is there a perfect
amount of repetitions to do there is
it's a trade secret but it's how long
will it take me to lose the muscles that
I've gained if I don't go back to the
gym after about 2 weeks of not lifting
we start to lose muscle but most people
think oh my God another 8 months just to
get back to where I started but when you
gain an initial amount of muscle it
never goes back to the same size as when
you started it's just always going to be
bigger and then got a couple of hours a
week I just want to get a bit leaner and
I want to gain some muscle okay the
first thing we do is Dr Michael are
there any supplements you suggest I take
whey protein casum protein what about
steroids Jesus Christ I'm really going
to say this he's recently on like a
boatload of steroids there are a few
downsides what are the downsides that no
one's talking about they're unspeakable
you really want want
know this is a sentence I never thought
I'd say in my life um we've just hit 7
million subscribers on YouTube and I
want to say a huge thank you to all of
you that show up here every Monday and
Thursday to watch our conversations um
from the bottom of my heart but also on
behalf of my team who you don't always
get to meet there's almost 50 people now
behind the dire of a CE that work to put
this together so from all of us thank
you so much um we did a raffle last
month and we gave away prizes for people
that subscribed to the show up until 7
million subscribers and you guys love
that raffle so much that we're going to
continue it so every single month we're
giving away money can't buy prizes
including meetings with me invites to
our events and ,000 gift vouchers to
anyone that subscribes to the DI CE
there's now more than 7 million of you
so if you make the decision to subscribe
today you can be one of those lucky
people thank you from the bottom of my
heart let's get to the
[Music]
conversation Dr
Michael what is the mission that you
find yourself on in this phase of your
life for those who would
like to get everyone who would like in
as good of shape as possible with as
minimum of a Time investment injury
probability and inconvenience in in
general as possible and the highest
likelihood of best results while trying
to completely excise doing anything that
is pointless and also I say this
politely telling people things that
aren't true we're trying to get as many
people fit leaner more muscular more
flexible healthier Etc as humanly
possible to the extent that they are
interested in that sort of thing because
not everyone's into fitness and I
understand that I mean I think I look
kind of you know freaky and it scares
certain people so I have a lot of time
for that but if you want to get fit uh
we're trying our best what are the the
big myths that end up standing in the
way of most people when they when they
hear this conversation now what are the
most frequent rebuttal that you'll get
when you say that someone can get in
shape and be be lean with limited time
two super common ones
are I don't have the time to work out
and into that time to work out is
included I don't have regular gym access
or I technically do but I'd have to
drive to the gym I just don't have the
time of the bandwidth where I don't have
the scheduling positioning in in my life
to do this sort of thing and baked into
that is the assumption that getting much
healthier and much leaner and much more
muscular takes like an inordinate amount
of time one of the most common questions
I get out in the real world when people
happen to look in my general direction
because usually people just kind of go
like what the hell is wrong that guy's
head but uh one of the most common
questions I get is how many uh hours a
day do you work out or how many days a
week do you work out and every single
person is expecting an answer that is
kind of like asking the tallest
basketball player you've ever met how
tall they are you want an answer that's
like 2 and 1 half meters you want
something meaty and if they tell you
like well I'm a meter 90 you're kind of
like is that that cool and every time I
tell them how much I work out which is
really like it at my real like trying to
be as good as bodybuilding as possible
is really eight hours a week and this is
to do this insane thing for people just
trying to be fit and healthy Etc where
talking about a sum total of 1 hour per
week split into two or three 20ish
minute sessions something we'll be
trying later on is such a huge stimulus
and can radically transform your body
especially if you have attention to
nutrition and that's the second thing
that's a big Dogma big myth is people
have ideas about what comes into
nutrition and nutrition for being more
lean more muscular and healthier they
have all these kind of a constellation
of ideas um uh Economist and philosopher
Thomas soell calls them Notions so if
you have a hierarchy of understanding
you have Theory at the top which is like
gravitation Evolution things super super
confirmed just beneath that you have
model like uh the standard model in
physics is not quite good enough quite
good enough support be a theory but it's
very well understood space with a few
Mysteries under that you have a
hypothesis which is you know you have a
real good idea formally phrased and
underneath that you have a notion and an
oce's just things people say and people
are like uhhuh and no one even asks or
answers about is this really true and so
when you talk to people about nutrition
or they talk to you about why they're
not in such great shape another thing I
get is when you're pretty jacked and
lean and you sit next to someone on a
plane they treat you almost like a
religious figure like a priest or an
imom and they're like apologize they're
like Co you look like you're in good
shape I just haven't been to the gym and
I'm like I love you as a human being no
matter all the time really all the time
they apologize for the state they're in
more or less yeah or they see me eat a
protein bar and they're getting like the
food on the plane and they're like this
is bad for me huh and I'm like no it's
actually quite fine and I always a
little bit confused so all these ideas
people have about nutrition organic
artificial sweeteners are bad
glutenfree GMOs um you have to have very
meticulously well-prepared meals there
is a ton of food that's huge laundr list
of food that's unhealthy and bad for you
makes you fat there are other foods that
are a little bit more nuanced and
difficult to find that are super Health
Foods and'll radically transform you I
can go on for hours about these myths
but people come in with these myths as
Notions as things they believe that
they're like this is how it is right and
when you tell them like actually that's
not true a lot of them are
like no way because maybe that's the
first time they've heard about it so you
tell people working out doesn't have to
last forever if you do it intelligently
which is what we specialize at RP about
teaching people how to do and
demonstrating digital
products you can get into really really
good shape with not so much time
investment and it's not so difficult
it's difficult in the moment as far as
you got to try hard but you know an hour
of trying hard a week is not the end of
the world and then a nutritional front
they come in and they think it takes all
these crazy special things like people
will watch me eat regular food and
they'll be like you eat that I'm like
yes like but I thought that you know but
you need the super special food I like
that's never been true but um people
come in with their stack of ideas and
these there's just dozens and dozens and
myths on both ends we'll go through all
of those myths but but my last question
before we get into it is why does it
matter to be in good shape and this is I
I'm asking you here to really draw on
some of the case studies that you've
probably been exposed to where people
have turned their lives around what is
the net benefit of someone who's
listening right now who's maybe heard
about Fitness stuff before and has heard
from personal trainers and bodybuilders
and whoever else but for whatever reason
they just haven't been able to get up
off the sofa and get into action it's
difficult you know what is why should
they why should they C I love that
question the first thing I'll say is um
is maybe not a surprise to many of the
people that know me politically I'm like
super pro freedom freedom of all kinds
inclusion and that means to me also that
if someone doesn't want to pursue
Fitness as a human being you have the
same love and respect at least for me
that anyone who's fit would have and so
as far as like it'll just make you a
better person and you you got to get fit
people will see uh people that are obese
and they're like look lazy and uh how do
they live with themselves I don't ever
think things like that not because I'm a
good person I'm not a good person at all
but what Fitness won't give you is it
won't elevate your status as a better
person in some way however the other
benefits of Fitness we could have a
10-hour podcast where I just go through
them one one at a time and we would
never get through all of them I'll give
you a couple of samplings of kind of the
big hitters
one is Health straight up so if you
reduce your body fat substantially and
you increase your muscularity
substantially and you adopt a lifestyle
of moderate to moderately High physical
activity quite
regularly this is about as close in real
life as we have so far to a Panacea a
cure all it isn't cure all but the
degree of
preventative uh you won't get really
sick very soon effect that has is just
radical I uh just coming off of them but
if it's okay to say it was recently on
like a boatload of steroids like the
worst ones got blood work right in the
middle of that because I was very lean
and very physically active and muscular
my blood Works Stellar just being leaner
and more muscular and more active just
cleans your blood work up like
crazyy and makes your longterm it
increases your longevity considerably
but it does something I think is pretty
close to equally important it
increases the kind of time you're having
in your life while you're alive uh it
makes it way better it reduces the
morbidity and so because you can be
around a long time living in an assisted
care facility and like on machines to
keep you that's you're alive sure but
there something missing there but if you
have more muscle less fat and more
physical activity you ever see like an
80-year-old that's like cardio walking
down the street and you're like my man
it'll you that so that's a big deal so
Health it'll give you usually people
experience a perception of Wellness
that's psychological they just feel
better they feel cleaner they feel more
energy the cognitive benefits of health
and fitness are now being addressed
seriously in the literature and they
have been for a little while but it's
kind of
swelling uh is unequivocally true now to
say that regularly engaging in Fitness
makes you literally smarter just
straight up and it conserves your
brain's cognitive health for decades
into the future as you do it
consistently it's just win all the way
across what is your background in terms
of your academic qualifications and
experiences that you've had that feed
into everything that you know this is
sounds so pretentious I can't believe
I'm using this nomenclature but I did my
undergraduate work at the University of
Michigan where I met uh my fellow
co-founder of RP Nick Shaw and um that
was in kinesiology uh specifically a
subset of something called movement
science I then went on to do a master's
in technically strength and conditioning
but exercise science at appalachin State
University then I went for one year to
go work in New York City with Nick as a
personal trainer at the end of that
process I realized that for my own
personal like Vibe I just didn't know
enough and I wanted to know more and so
I got accepted to a PhD program at East
Tennessee State University under the
great Mike Stone who is probably one of
the most well-published sports
scientists of all time maybe definitely
the conversation for the greatest
American Sports scientist of all time
and I went to that PhD program and that
was in sport physiology and the best way
we had of summarizing what it is we were
learning is the thing we're learning
best here is how to take good athletes
and make them better and so I did three
years of that it sounds like a it's like
a prison time I did three years in
ETSU and uh that was the conclusion I
was a terminal degree I got a PhD in
sport physiology and then I spent oh gez
10 years in various uh professorships uh
teaching and doing some research and all
this other stuff I'm no longer a college
professor mostly because like there's
only so many things you can do at the
same time well and it was kind of like
this is this YouTube thing is getting
kind of insane so time to Pivot to that
but uh I'm still actively involved in
research our company funds research I
still look at manuscripts I still
co-author so I'm still involved in that
capacity as well so I want to start with
a start if someone's listening to this
right now and they have walked into your
this is your uh this is your practice
this is your hypertrophy practice let's
say this table and they sit there and
they say I would like to gain more lean
muscle mass and I'd like to lose some
weight um I live A busy life where do we
start what step one and you know like
I'm actually going to Hazard a guess at
step one to see if I'm correct but for
me step one is quite psychological
because it's all well and good me having
the tactics and strategies and the
information but if I don't have the
motivation none of it's going to matter
anyway so is step one psychological in
some way absolutely my God you should
just be taking my job with this point no
but okay I thought so I thought that was
so what what would you do for me to get
me in the right psychological
mindset I would even take a step back
before that okay the first thing we do
is called the needs analysis and formal
Sport Science a needs analysis is what
do you
want specifically do you want bigger
arms how much muscle are you trying to
gain it's a very different conversation
of someone weighs 150 pounds and they're
like I want to be 155 but leaner versus
I weigh 150 pounds and I want to be 200
ripped different timelines different
approaches different trade-offs okay
give me the
typical answer to that question most
people just open-ended to be completely
honest honest you're like I just want to
get much leaner and some of them will
say I also want to put on a lot of
muscle the muscle thing is a lot of
times with females they just want the
leaner part but they understand in many
cases that if they just jettison their
muscle entirely they end up looking more
sick than healthy uh but a lot of the
males leaner is important but also
getting super jacked is important but
how jacked and how lean that's the
conversation is if they come in with
totally open-ended concerns it's kind of
like walking into a car dealership and
being like I want a car like you going
to have to be a little I we'll sell you
whatever you're going to have to tell me
a little bit more about what your use
cases are about what your budget is so
that's another big thing in a need
analysis is how much time can you give
to this because if someone says I want
to eventually be a professional
bodybuilder and I've got nothing but
time in my week to do the thing think
getting a very different plan than
someone that's like I just want to be
able to see my man down there again and
like just not die soon and I have two
hours a week to give you very different
plan so I've got let's say I've got a
couple of hours a week so you know two
three hours a week that I could probably
spare maybe four and I just want to get
a bit leaner and I want to gain some
muscle yeah I also ask what have you
been doing so far tell me about your
approach to Fitness and the answer could
be I don't have one I've never tried to
do anything once we get a lot of that
information I don't want to say the plan
writes itself but sort of almost now we
really really really have all the
details to fill in the blanks and then
from there once you've done that sort of
needs analysis and you've understood the
investment that they're willing to make
you understand what their goals are you
understand their current approach to
Fitness what becomes step two so if
again I'm trying to embody the viewer
here who's trying to change their life
yeah yeah get going for step two often
times uh just to keep it SCH we can I we
definitely do nutrition uh if you'd like
so please C me in for that but I'll just
use um training as a quick example here
uh a big one is do you go to a gym can
you make it to a gym or are you going to
be training at home because training at
home is a bit of a different world you
can get amazing results at home but we
need to make sure you have the right
equipment and it's super minimal two 20
lb dumbbells I like that you're looking
over at the dumbbells like are those 20
kg dumbbells they're 20 pound dumbbells
is that what I need at home for many
people 20 like adult males white spry
like yourself 20 pound dumbbells at home
will give you phenomenal overall result
yeah what is that nine kgs or something
oh here we go your assistance are quite
strong by the way thank do you fight
crime in your spare
time okay so these are 20 pound
dumbbells You're just showing off now
but but these are what I need at home to
to do a workout uh yeah somewhere
between 10 and 20 pounds 10 for small
smaller lighter females 20 for larger
more strong males somewhere between that
two of those dumbbells at home and a
little bit of floor space can be the
beginning of an absolutely revolutionary
workout program really yeah oh yeah how
so give me the starting position and the
end position that I could get to just
with these dumbbells at home if you
properly control your diet and you
haven't really lifted weights before and
you're let's say 30 40 50 years old in a
6month time span we can reliably get you
to gain 5 to 10 lounds of muscle which
if you go to the store what is that like
five let's say the two to five kilos of
muscle you ever buy two to five kilos of
meat at the store that's a lot of meat
that's going on your body and we can
reliably get you to lose oh gee five to
7 and 1 12 kilos of fat in a six-month
time frame just by being intelligent
about your diet and doing two workouts
per week at home with your dumbbells and
the workouts each take roughly 20
minutes so that's 40 minutes a week oh
yeah now that's if you're unaccustomed
and unadjusted if you have already and
that's why those intake questions are
important because if you're like look I
go to the gym six times a week I spend
two hours at the gym like them dumbbells
can keep you in pretty good shape but
they're not going to elevate your shape
very likely at very least it'll be
highly inefficient and incredibly
discomforting for what you'd have to do
with such
dumbbells so what is step three then so
if we've got the equipment part figured
out and I guess the complicated element
of that is some people have anxiety as
it relates to going to the gym I've got
a lot of friends that because they're so
inexperienced with weightlifting or the
machines they feel embarrassed to go to
the gym so that well at least that's
what they tell me now I don't know
whether they're Beering themselves but
they tell me that they have gym anxiety
you know you walk and I no actually I
can relate you walk into a gym
especially if I go to like a uh like a
bodybuilding gym and I do look around I
go okay everyone here knows what they're
doing more than I do o that's already
wrong but we'll get to that a bit and
are they looking at me are they do they
know that I I don't know how this
machine works and if I don't know how a
machine works and there's nothing you
know No Label to tell me sometimes I
just avoid the machine if I'm in in like
a bodybuilding gym because I [__]
hell I don't know how to do my wrist
muscles yeah I just look like a doofus
and everyone's making fun of me in their
head what I think sometimes if I go to
like a really Elite Gym so yeah so first
of all I think people's gym anxiety is
absolutely real thing I can speak to
that at at length The Next Step would be
to say Hey listen based on all the
information we've collected on your
limitations desires abilities we've
cultivated a plan for you be diet plan
and just just stick into the muscle
growth
stuff here's your plan for your
training and we actually have an app for
this sort of thing where we would say
okay here's how you you type in all your
stuff in the app the app will create a
plan for you and it'll tell you here's
what to do for warming up here's you
know you pick a weight it tells you how
to pick your weights and then it
programs the rest of your two months of
training for you you fill in the how do
we how do I feel how am I recovering
it'll take care of everything else and
if you ever get confused you click on
the exercise and it opens up a video
with an audio demonstration of how to do
it and of someone a professional
bodybuilder doing the thing you go oh
that's that's what bicep curls was okay
got it so now you have all the answers
and you don't have to have our app we
think it's nice you don't have to have
it just whatever kind of plan you have
that's your little map of the Caribbean
Sea with the AIS and the pirate ships
and you know exactly where to go and
it's you your app or your map of how to
train your program and everyone else
like in The Avengers movie it's just
just floats away there's no one else
there's not even any other machines it's
you and the bicep curl machine
and the hypertrophy app says first set
is 12 reps at 50 pounds I take the
select Dr stack I go to 50 and I'm nice
and warmed up and I do 12 reps and
that's as far as you have to think about
it comparisons whatever everyone else
thinks without a plan oh boy are you
second guessing yourself with a plan you
don't have to second guess anything most
those people don't have a plan they're
just in there on Vibes I feel like my
delts are going to grow today if I do
this like thanks thanks for that
intellectual opinion you said there's
two types of effective training one of
them's H H can't say this but one of
them is hypertrophy very good and the
other one is
periodization uh so periodization is the
scientifically based organization of any
kind of training that you want okay
hypertrophy training is a type of
training it's just muscle growth
training it's like a fancy [__]
science word for just getting more
jacked putting on muscle that's the
technical definition of hypertrophy and
when you train for hypertrophy you can
do it kind of like by feel and more or
less at random and you'll get pretty
good results in most cases but to get
your best results you want that training
to be periodized periodization is the
scientific approach to how to organize
your training to get sort of roughly
three things some of these are a bit
more for athletes and not regular people
get the best results that you can Peak
at an appropriate time abs for summer
and minimize injury risk and taking all
the science that we know that plan that
you've made because you did in an
evidence-based fashion that is now what
is considered a periodized plan so
that's how those two concepts relate to
each other what do I need to know about
hypertrophy in order to be able to
achieve it is there anything really
foundational because I think everyone
wants a bit of muscle growth and I spend
I think I spend too long in the gym I
think I could be much more efficient um
when I'm training what would you
recommend that I start thinking about as
F foundational principles when it comes
to hypertrophy muscle growth one is
specificity it's the most important
principle in all of sport painting and
exercise science is uh what am I here
for what do I want because you can do a
bunch of exercises in the gym and you're
like that was great and someone's like
are you getting the results you like
you're like well I what I want is a
bigger bicep like how many bicep
exercises do you do like I think upright
rows maybe so I want a bigger bicep
bicep if we just focus on me give
getting Steven B a bigger left bicep so
specificity is telling yourself okay I
want bigger biceps and whatever XYZ
other
muscles then we move in to the principle
of overload which means you have to
challenge
yourself if most of your
sets someone else watching them can't
tell if you're warming up or doing
what's called a working set like a real
set you have a problem so towards the
end of all of your sets either the
weights are slowing down or even if it's
the same speed to you they feel
perceptively harder you know you do this
this this and in a couple reps you're
like that's what you want every real
working set should be challenging you
should be work approaching every real
set with just a teeny teeny dose of
trepidation like oh boy here we go I'm
GNA have to
try once you have that and a set is a a
group of repetitions correct so if I do
10 repetitions that's one set one set
yeah and so your sets have to be
sufficiently heavy uh anything between
between roughly five reps per set and 30
reps per set where the last few reps are
getting close to you not being able to
use good technique and lift the weights
check plus so there's not a set a
perfect amount of repetitions to do
there is it's a trade secret and I'd
have to say it off camera to you like ND
assign okay we're off camera all right
great so it's
17 um there is so there's just tons of
tons of contextual Nuance kind of stuff
some people some of their muscles will
seem respond better to sets a five to 10
other folks even the same person could
have muscles in their body that really
respond better to sets of 20 to 30 and
everything in between but generally you
get in in the exercise science data
you'll have a group of people training
for sets of roughly five reps and
another group training for sets of
roughly 30 reps and their change in
muscle growth over 8 12 16 weeks is
statistically undifferenced
that's so crazy using the same weight
I'm guessing different weight a weight
that is challenging for five reps is
much heavier than a weight that is
challenging for 30 okay so I do Wonder
this all the time when I go to the gym I
wonder if I should be doing I don't know
30 reps of 10 kg on my bicep or I should
be doing 10 reps of 20 kg they're both
right answers no wrong answers there and
they both have the same chance of
growing my muscles as long as the strain
that I experience subjectively is
difficult at the end of those set
correct okay interesting which is really
good news because that's like another
thing you don't have to worry about
which means at home I can get any range
of Weights versus having to get really
really big ones to gr as long as they're
not so tiny that you're on rep number 45
and you're like I could just do this for
forever or they're not so enormous that
you're like I can't really even do two
reps of this anything between roughly
five and roughly 30 reps challenging is
really really good how many sets and how
often do I have to visit the gym to get
this bicep to grow that answer depends
on how much you've been doing before
okay but if you're new to the gym two
sessions a week with two to three sets
per session for your biceps is something
that's going to cause months and months
and months of consistent progress can
you do more yes do you have to do as a
beginner no eventually as a more
advanced person do you need to do more
sets and perhaps more sessions to get
consistently better results yes but for
beginners who haven't been in the gym
very much or at all the minimal
effective dose is profoundly small which
is why I can say things like if you work
out for 20 minutes twice a week you're
going to get great gains what if I go to
the gym and I do six sets on my biceps
and I just go to the gym once a week
does the distance between the workouts
in a muscle group have an impact yes
once a week training gives you good
results but twice a week training for
the same muscle gives you notably better
results training three times a week
versus twice tce training four times a
week versus three times training five
times a week versus four times is uh an
an exponentially de-escalating amount of
impressive differences so one time a
week Works it'll get you results two
times a week gets you like one and a
half times the results like way better
better three times a week is like
another little bit more results still
notable four times a week is like you
got to be training for a while to notice
the difference between three and four
four and five is contextual and nuanced
and I can't actually tell you that
categorically 5 days a week is better
than four there are some things I would
have to know about your plan and
everything else to make that conclusion
so really I want to be aiming at twice a
week per muscle group twice is our
minimum two to four times a week is what
I say is kind of the best overall
recommendation per muscle group and if
you train all of your muscles together
at the same time a whole body workout
which most people in the realm of just
I'm busy and I can't train a lot it
would be all of the major muscles of
your body in the same session twice or
three times or four times a week and
that is an awesome beginner fitness plan
what's going on in my muscles that's
encouraging them and making them grow
and when are they growing is it when I
go to bed at night is it when I do they
grow the minute that I curl the the
dumbbell what's actually going on
because sometimes understanding what's
actually going on inside helps me to
think through and change my behavior
yeah so uh the primary stimulus for
muscle growth is there are molecular
machines in your muscles in your muscle
cells and they are designed to detect
the presence of
tension and when your muscles generate
tension the molecular detector machines
go o we got tension here and they start
uh saying to other parts of the cells
like hey uh let's get this muscle growth
thing started started not happening
started it's a stimulus of muscle growth
there are a couple of other mechanisms
which might SL probably have an effect
and that a couple of them are metabolite
sequestration which is a very fancy way
of saying the burn you know at the end
of a set you're like ah the metabolites
the um byproducts of training if they
accumulate to high levels it's been
shown in tons of animal studies and a
few human studies that like
mechanistically they might also tell the
molecular Machinery that grows muscle
for you again later to uh hey get the
muscle growth process another one is the
pump so you know you do a couple sets of
biceps you're oh my God what's going on
here baby flash it at some girl she runs
away as usual and the actual cell
swelling itself might play a causal
mechanistic role in generating more
muscle growth but but we know it's
probably at least at Le least 80% of the
muscle growth anyone will see is because
of those receptors for tension muscle
growth as soon as you leave the gym is a
negative because the gym is catabolic
it's a breaks down your muscle actually
training breaks down more muscle than it
builds however as you go home and you
start eating food protein carbs fats and
you have several meals per day and
you're resting when the food's coming in
several hours after training begins if
you measure muscle growth consistently
which is really difficult to do they
don't do it super often you have to keep
people in a laboratory you have to do
radioactive tracers and measure all this
weird
stuff every couple of hours they measure
the amount of muscle growth that's going
on in the biceps goes up and up and up
and up and it usually Peaks
about half a day to a day and a half
after you lift depend depending on how
hard you went if it's a pretty easy
workout it Peaks a little sooner and
Dives and drops off about a day or two
later if you train really crazy hard
it'll Peak like a day day and a half
later and then half a week later it'll
drop off back to Baseline levels but
it's this really smooth curve and you're
growing muscle at every single point
under that curve So when you say is it
while I'm sleeping is it while I'm
eating is it while I'm resting the aners
all of those except it's not at the gym
you don't grow muscle at the gym you
give yourself a signal to grow muscle at
the gym and then what you do outside of
the gym matters so some people train
really hard they don't eat right they
don't need enough protein their sleep is
total insert bad word here and their
stress levels are just totally psychotic
they train hard and then week after week
after week they're like not seeing any
results well the results are actually
created when you're resting when you're
sleeping when you're eating nutritious
food they're stimulated in the workout
but that's just phase one phase two the
actual growth occurs outside the gym and
it occurs not in any any specific time
Point like a Magic Window of two hours
after the gym like that's when all the
growth occurs that's actually when it
just starts to go up it's four days
afterwards so if you train twice a week
you train on Monday you're going a lot
of muscle on Monday night Tuesday and
Wednesday back uh towards the end of
Wednesday you're just not really growing
much more muscle you go back to the gym
Thursday you hit it hard again you hit
that curve up by Sunday you're totally
relaxed during Sunday you're not growing
any muscle your body's really recovering
a lot of that fatigue and then by Monday
you're fresh as a pickle and you're
ready to go at it again how long will it
take me to lose the muscles that I've
gained if I don't go back to the gym so
again focusing on this bicep I train it
I do two times a week I get it nice and
big how long before it
vanishes great question two-part
answer part one
is within about two weeks of not
training
it the first reduction in muscle that is
detected by Modern Machinery occurs so
if you don't lift for 2 weeks and we put
you in an MRI scanner or a dexa scanner
let's say a week and a half you don't
lift I can't tell you're not really
losing any muscle yet you're just going
insane and so me personally I'm like
addicted to lifting so if I don't lift
for a week I'm like oh my God oh my God
all my muscle's gone there is some kind
of intuitive truth to that because when
you don't stress your muscles they when
you do stress your muscles they get a
little bit inflamed and they bulge up a
little bit B so when you're not training
for half a week to a week your muscles
look smaller like they've lost weight
but it's really just all water that they
lost you do one gym session thinking
like oh my God my biceps are gone a week
and a half later you do one session at
the end of that you flex and you're like
oh my God I'm the biggest I've ever been
I was just delusional that whole time CU
that stuff comes back super quick after
about two weeks of not lifting you start
to lose muscle but it happens really
really slowly and takes weeks and weeks
and weeks and weeks after for several
months of not lifting you're going to
look considerably smaller in your biceps
but probably not as small as when you
started lifting because your muscles
have a certain memory if we can call it
that is that true that thing oh yeah and
so a lot of times when you gain an
initial amount of muscle especially if
you've been at it for years it just
never goes back to the same size as when
you started it's just always going to be
bigger until you reach your 80s or
something like that that being said yes
you will notice reductions size so two
weeks is the direct answer there and
it's going to take weeks and weeks and
months and months to recede however
here's part two and this is awesome news
because of that muscle memory
situation however long it took you to
gain the muscles
initially it's going to take you an
order of magnitude a factor of 10ish or
so less time to get it back if you've
been more jacked before if you've had
bigger muscles they come back to their
old size
if it took if you you you lifted for
eight months you got a bigger bicep and
you stopped Lifting for three months and
it looks about the same as when you
started if you're really careful like
okay it's a little bit bigger but really
it's just back to square one most people
think oh my God another eight months
just to get back to where I started like
forget the gym the truth is after
roughly about a month maybe as little as
3 weeks you're going to have the same
size biceps that you did in your Peak
because the degree to which your tissue
grows if it's been a certain size before
especially if it was notably bigger than
normal and you held that around for a
few months and a few years it comes back
in a way that is so fast If you
experience If you experience it yourself
it's it's like you don't believe that
it's happening to you you they been able
to like scientifically test this oh yeah
all the time yeah retraining studies
detraining retraining oh yeah they've
they've done studies where they
purposefully like lift for a while and
they stop Lifting for a long time and
they see how long it takes to get back
and
um there's one study I'm familiar with
offand that there's a group of people
that trained consistently for multiple
weeks and there's another group of
people that trained consistently for a
few weeks and then took two weeks
completely off in the middle and then
just started retraining again for a few
weeks later both groups had identically
sized differences in muscle at the end
of the study and so we were like okay so
so that group that trained consistently
never took two weeks off could we say
that they purposefully like dunked two
weeks of their time away for nothing
uhhuh yeah your body goes right back
into regaining old lost muscle so
rapidly that this is such great news
because look let's say you lifted
consistently most of the Year holiday
season comes up Winter
holidays you're not going to the gym as
much maybe not at all three weeks later
of no gym you look at yourself you look
a little small or kind of deflated and
you're like oh my God I'm going to have
to restart all this from scrap
nope two weeks later you're in the best
shape of your life again if you left the
gym for 6 months one or two months later
you're in the best shape of your life
again that's how rapidly it comes back
so it's really good news for anyone who
hasn't been in the gym and is feeling
guilty about it go back get consistent
again you're just going to Skyrocket
that is very exciting because yeah we
always have sometimes it's the trough
the the couple of weeks off that makes
us demotivated cuz that's crossed my
mind before Oh my God that took me three
months to get there and it's going to
take me another 3 months to get back but
what about so if I'm training that bicep
how have I got to think about stretching
and warming up before I start before I
get going with my training there are
many ways to do it but uh there's some
research on this recently
actually you don't need much one of the
simplest ways to warm up that we
recommended RP and our app has it in the
in the
instructions you want let's say you have
your final weight already picked out
like last week did 20 lb dumbbells for
sets of 15 this week it's sets of 16
with the 20 lb dumbbells what you want
to do is you want to do very lightweight
maybe the 5B dumbbells for a set of 12
just to get everything moving and
grooving good technique same technique
you're going to
use 30 seconds of rest a minute of rest
you pick up
the 10 or 15 PB dumbbells you do a set
of eight reps there a little bit more
challenging your feel your grooove a
little bit but your body is already more
warm your nervous system is more active
your muscles are more
pliable you rest a minute after that and
then you'll pick up the weight you're
actually using the 20 Pounders and
you'll do a set of two to four reps with
them just to get the feel of that heavy
weight that you're going to be doing to
climatize not just your muscles and your
nervous system but your psychology to
like okay this is this is the business
weight that I'm going to be using so 12
84 rest another 30 seconds first working
set of whatever 6 reps you're up when
you have multiple exercises for the same
muscle group you just need to do one set
of like four to eight reps in that
middle weight range between zero and
whatever you're going to do just to get
the feel of the exercise because you're
already generally warm in that area one
little warmup set rest uh you know 30
seconds to a minute and then hit your
first set if you're switching which
muscles you're using like you were
training chest but then in the same
session you started training back that
first back exercise 1284 the weight goes
up up up the Reps go down down down just
a little bit of time between and then
you hit your first work set you're good
to go you don't have to do cardio before
you don't have to get on the treadmill
you can if you like it you don't have to
do some kind of cardio warm-up you don't
have to do any kind of stretching or
anything like that you don't have to do
any kind of weird bosu ball band around
your neck crazy potentiation exercises
just that little ramp up is basically
98% of all cases exactly and only what
you need to do what is a warm-up what is
going on physiologically inside my
muscle cuz we we all just warm up and I
don't think anybody actually knows what
what's going on yeah so your muscle
tissues um they have uh they have
physical qualities that can be measured
almost in like a fluid dynamics terms
like viscosity and hysteresis and all
that stuff and so when you're very cold
a lot of times the uh there's kind of a
Frailty implied there as you're warming
up you're sending blood to around the
muscle the muscle itself is literally
becoming warmer and a lot of those kind
of tight structures that are uh they
proteins that are made of kind of a
stretchy material they loosen up a
little bit and that allows you to go
through that full range of motion and
training and not actually get hurt and
that's from the muscle perspective you
also get some kind of chemical stuff
that happens and certain structures fill
up with chemicals certain structures
chemicals go down and that gets you
ready to perform super hard work but
that's part of the story the other part
is the nervous system because your
nervous system is also getting warmed up
and in technical terms it's called
potentiation when you just show up to
the gym and you let's say we said look
okay we re-engineered your tendons when
you were asleep you're not going to get
hurt it's impossible for you to get hurt
like a car would have to hit you for you
to rip your bicep off you can just go
and just hit the curls right away you
wouldn't get hurt but it would feel
really strange and you wouldn't get four
or five reps close to where you're
supposed to be from last week because
your nervous system was like what hell
is going on I'm supposed to be doing
something so you need warm up the
nervous system a part of that is
literally like the actual nervous system
itself down to the C Level is Flushing
all kinds of metabolites through the
connections are getting stronger you're
uh sort of doing a little bit of kind of
mini rewiring of primary motor cortex to
say go oh we're doing curls this is how
you execute this pattern another part is
technical like oh this is the technique
I'm going to do because if you just get
in the muscle and just do stuff like
imagine if I told you like hey here's a
ball just like go go shoot some hoops
just hit that you know three-pointer
shot you're
like I need a couple shots to remind my
body of what it's like to shoot the
basketball same idea for lifting you to
remind your body of what a curl motion
is and if you remind it a couple sets in
a row by the time you hit that real
working set that fourth set your body's
like I know exactly what I'm going to do
which parts of the muscle I'm going to
activate to contract which other parts
of other muscles am going to activate to
relax and co-contract to make this whole
thing happen what are the the other sort
of common mistakes people make when they
they go to the gym or they start
training or they start exercising so
there I've I've kind of ticked off not
stretching and taking on a heavy load
too quickly um but also ramping up
volumes and loads too fast so that sort
of over strained before my body is ready
for it are there any really other sort
of common obvious mistakes people make
that inhibit their progress
one of them is a failure to pay
attention to good technique okay there
are sort of some Universal principles of
what is good technique in the gym for
muscle
growth one of them is are you moving in
a way that properly activates stimulates
that muscle to actually get it to grow
because if you do a curl that arcs up it
does a lot of bicep if you do a curl
that arcs back this way because the
bicep is being pulled one way and pulled
the other way at the shoulder and the
elbow it ends up doing more of um
stabilizing contraction than actually
being the prime mover for the movement
so when you see people curling at the
gym and they're just kind of doing this
you're like yes that is training your
biceps but if you just moved a little
bit differently it would be so so much
better here's another example squatting
right for your legs if you squat really
far back and not so far down like you're
your glutes get hit okay your lower back
and upper and midback is going to get
hit a lot but because there's not a huge
change in your knee angle you're not
getting a ton of quad stimulus if you
stay more upright and your heels and
toes are on the ground and you allow
your knees to go Way Forward beyond your
toes as you stay upright and sink down
really low so that your knee goes into
one of these oh my God it's all quads
all day long so you want technique that
is targeting the muscle it's very
similar rep to rep to rep and it puts
the muscle consistently through a range
of motion that is in that deep painful
uh length and stretch position if you
just have all those three everything
else we can say about your Technique is
just nuances and finer points those are
really the big ones we talked about
nutrition earlier as well so if I want
to make my bicep grow and also drop off
the weight around the bicep so you can
see see it even more what should I be
putting into my
mouth the number one requisite for
muscle growth is
protein foods with lots of protein in
them ideally should be consumed three to
five times per day at roughly
equidistant intervals breakfast lunch
dinner totally fine even better
breakfast lunch dinner evening
snack the average person
needs a little bit less than let's say a
gram per pound of body weight per day of
protein actually considerably less
that's kind of the top limit and a cool
aspirational thing to shoot for so if
you weigh let's say 200 lb you should be
consuming something like 150 to 200
grams of protein per day and 150 for
almost everyone's totally enough but if
you're real serious and hardcore and
just want that insurance policy 200
grams of protein per day so then if
you're eating four times a day that's oh
yeah 30 40 let's say 40 to 50 grams of
protein per meal can I eat too much
protein and and then it becomes fat or
something uh that's uh so protein by
itself no if your protein is so high
that your carbs and fats are the same
and you jack up your protein super high
but your carbs and fats stay where they
are your calories become excessive that
will cause fing over time but if you're
doing a diet where you take a ton of
protein but you dropped your carbs and
fats and your calories are at
maintenance levels you're not going to
gain any fat it's not bad for your
kidneys it's not bad for any other part
of your body excessive protein as a
health malady has been a myth the entire
time and that's one of those um Notions
that people carry with them that too
much protein is bad right like yes if
you've had kidney surgery absolutely
short of that you're probably good to go
you'll fart a lot and people will hate
you but you know you mentioned three to
five meals a
day a lot of people are now in this Camp
of of fasting an intermittent fasting
and not eating often is it possible to
fast but also to gain muscle mass in the
way that you've described yeah totally
it just won't happen at as an impressive
rate so you have to make a trade-off for
yourself if you want you know most
jacked Steven that you can be three to
five meals a day consistently spread in
almost to an
individual competitive bodybuilders eat
that frequently and eat high protein how
often did you eat uh I eat five five
times a day four or five times a day
usually and do you eat before or after
you train both okay so before you train
and after you train do you different
things a times I'll train early in the
morning and so I won't train at I won't
eat at all I'll wake up and I'll have
like a protein and carb mix shake with
my training totally optional super extra
credit may not do anything at all if you
look at the literature but I find it a
little bit compelling to do a little bit
of that and then afterwards I have my
first post-workout meal second meal
third meal fourth meal bedtime wake up
do it again what you take to get you
going do you do pre-workout no why no uh
I don't do any stimulants of any kind
why uh I'm just kind of coked up all the
time naturally so like if you give me
stimulants it's just going to go into
the not so pleasant side of side effects
like I'm just going to be like this and
way too amped up super high anxiety and
my thoughts get to be like I have less
fluidity of thinking and stuff so I just
it just a lot of me I guess and so when
I wake up in the morning I don't need
anything to get me going I just go and a
couple warm-up sets later I have all the
energy I need that's not everyone and so
some green tea some black coffee or some
pre-workout 30 minutes before the the
gym is great advice for a ton of people
I feel like pre-workout can't be healthy
if you're doing it five six seven times
a week because some of that stuff is so
unbelievably strong like I've had it
before I've got literally like heart
palpitations when I've had a pre-workout
and you know you talk about anxiety that
anxious feeling it can't be it can't be
help healthy for people to be doing that
frequently it seems to be quite fine it
seems to be quite fine now at the
extremes and in for some individuals
it's not ideal but um the upper limit
dose of caffeine in milligrams per day
at which we can confidently say most
people will experience the beginnings of
Health
maladies is a th000
milligrams and a cup of coffee has
depending on which cup 50 to 100 now
some pre-workouts have 250 gr milligrams
of caffeine some have
500 uh last I checked Ronnie Coleman's
pre-workout has 550 migs of caffeine per
scoop or per serving and so that's kind
of a lot uh I if I took 550 migs of
caffeine you don't take me to the gym
just take me right to the hospital put
me in the psychiatric word 36 hours
later I'll be okay but for some people
to get so accustomed to high doses of
caffeine that is supposed not unhealthy
for them to consume and also uh they
feel quite fine so I would say start
with as little as you need to get you
going and if you need to tight trate and
work up from there that's a good thing
the other thing I would say is I would
have a compelling case for pre-workout
or stimulant if I ask you like hey how
much energy do you typically have at the
gym you're like well that's super great
and they're like should I take
pre-workout I'd be like no there's no
compelling case for that at all if
you're like look I wake up in the
morning some days I just don't get a ton
of sleep and I need something to get me
going not every day but sometimes I'll
be like hey look consider green tea
black coffee some diet soda or all the
way up to pre-workout if you need it but
some people take it kind of a like um a
like a religious thing as a habit uh as
a ritual and it's like dude you're
training your forms and biceps for 20
minutes total at 900 p.m. you do not
need three scoops of pre-workout for
that I don't even know where it's going
at that point so some people get a
little crazy with the pre-workouts at
the end of the world it's at at best
needless what's your stance on the whole
idea of calories in calories out a lot
of people just focus on that as their
their sort of their script to lose body
weight lose body fat and gain muscle is
is that a useful frame to to use and why
do so many people fail at it if if it is
a useful frame most people fail at it
because they don't consider both the
calories in and calories outside of the
equation and a lot of people fail
because they're very bad at estimating
food amounts and calories they someone
will say like a tablespoon of peanut
butter Stephen if you ever actually seen
a tablespoon measuring cup it does not
look like Mom's tablespoon where she
takes the peanut butter and goes that's
like four tablespoons and so like but
I'm eating the calories blah blah blah
every time you take people into what's
called a metabolic Ward which is a study
center where you're not allowed to have
visitors that bring you food the workers
only give you the food that you need and
all of your exercise and your output is
controlled and monitored and so is your
intake no one has ever violated laws of
thermodynamic we give you a certain
number of calories and we expect you to
lose a certain number of weight there's
a variance about that but it you're
going to lose the weight that roughly we
predict if we account for all variables
you're going to lose almost exactly the
weight that we predict so calories in
calories out is incontrovertible in
among 90s something per 98% of people
who do research in the field and are
scientifically literate and educated
calories in calories out is not
controversial it never has been there
are some people who say well calorie
counting didn't work for me that's
probably because you did it wrong or you
weren't even concerned about how much
protein you're taking in or how many
carbs or how many fats there are other
details that matter like if you say I
need a V8 engine in a car that's all
that matters like okay well there's no
steering wheel there's no pedals cool
well okay I need those things too so
calories and calories out is the very
core because without an engine you're
not going anywhere but what types of
foods you're eating matters a little bit
are you getting enough protein carbs
fats that matters a bit too so people
like to just bash calorie balance and
calories in calories out is well it's
it's totally myth it doesn't work no no
it works great it's just not always
enough to get you in the best shape you
can but if you do it right as far as net
balance weight gain or weight loss
calories in calories out is actually the
only thing that matters tissue wise is
that gain mostly muscle or mostly fat is
the loss mostly muscle or mostly fat
that has not so much to do with calories
it has much more to do with proteins
carbs fats the quality of food you're
eating nutrient timing and all the rest
of it so calories and calories out is
amazing super explanatory critical but
it's just not the whole picture and
that's really it I guess because so many
people say they've heard about calories
and calories out but they fail at
maintaining it now that's really about
motivation and the psychology of doing
such a thing um some people have said to
me that our bodies want to defend our
weight so if we start eating less we'll
become a little bit more hungry if we go
for a run after the run or after
physical exertion our body will try and
make up for it because it's programmed
to try and defend its weight because its
weight cor relates to our ability to
survive
um why do people fail at it one of the
reasons you said is because you know
that they're not actually measuring the
calories correctly but the psychological
reasons that it isn't hasn't worked for
some people can you think of many
because when I when people talk about
calories in calories out if you look at
the comment sections on those videos
people say I've tried this and it didn't
work okay so first of all I typically
don't look at comment sections of videos
because comment section is not
representative of the population it's
not represent reprentative of the people
that watch your videos it's not
representative of the hardcore
demographic that watches your videos so
just as a statistical artifact every
single Claim by people against calorie
balance in that comment section could be
true for them but they represent 1% of
the population so 99% of people at works
just fine for 1% they get into some kind
of trouble usually that trouble is they
didn't count calories properly they
didn't account for macronutrient profile
proteins carbs fats they didn't account
for nutrient timing or the kinds of food
that they're they're doing and so on and
so forth and another one is like you
said
sustainability how long do I have to
count calories for in my life for me to
get the body that I want and keep it is
sure [__] not going to be forever so
what I'll do is I'll count calories for
a few months I'll lose a lot of weight
then I'll go back to eating on Vibes and
the weight comes right back absolutely
so better than just counting calories
what we want to do is instill people
with good eating habits if you learn how
to construct meals made of lean proteins
veggies fruits whole grains healthy fats
you know roughly how to see how much
food you need and how much food looks at
least like it's what you eat per day if
you're checking your body weight
relatively often and when your body
weight starts to get a little higher you
kind of clean up your diet a little bit
uh and when your body weight's nice and
low you couple cheat meals couple kebabs
you know burgers and stuff that's all
good if you do that and you have those
healthy habits whatever weight you lost
on calorie restriction you can maintain
with very very little work not counting
a damn thing just on good habits but but
if you counted calories you do some
weird diet where you only eat like too
with orange slices and protein shakes or
something yeah the calorie counting will
get you wherever you need to go but then
afterwards like the diet's over and
you're like now what do I do like uh
good luck going out in the world and
feating the same diet that got you fat
in the first place that's the big kicker
people might say it takes too much time
to count calories it leads to a an
unhealthy relationship with food I think
there's a big movement at the moment to
trying to get calories off menus because
it's said to increase the amount of
people that have eating disorders and
things like
that is that a a conversation worth
entertaining in this in this regard sure
sure very few people will develop Eating
Disorders based on increases in
information they are presented I would
actually call that eating order instead
of eating
disorder most people who get Eating
Disorders are highly at risk genetically
and with a few other social
circumstances
Eating Disorders are uh for example the
most uh deleterious Eating Disorders
anorexia
nervosa seen not exclusively but almost
exclusively in females of reproductive
age they ain't calories on a menu doing
that that's something you bring into the
table usually because you have the
genetic proclivity for it and
additionally because you've been in a
social and cultural circumstance where
not only were you the wrong person to
get ridiculed for your weight but also a
lot of people ridiculed you for your
weight and then you go all careening off
on this path where no one can even tell
you're super skinny anymore because you
don't believe it so the idea that uh
you're going to see much higher
prevalence globally in Eating Disorders
from putting menu calorie labels on
things is true by this much at the
margins and it's just largely not the
case adjacent to that is this idea of
muscle dysmorphia which affects
a lot of people but specifically men
roughly 87% of men that are between 15
to 32 years old that experience muscle
dysmorphia which is what so muscle
dysmorphia generally is for whatever
level of jacked that you are you think
you are considerably less jacked both in
reference to yourself and your own
desires and in reference to an ethereal
make belief comparator population in
your head so if you were to ask like hey
Mike do you feel jacked and I'm like
nope you're like oo not good not a good
sign clearly he's jacked and then you
can ask me Mike compared to other
40-year-old ashkanazi Jewish men how
Jacked are you and if I'm like I'm
probably like bottom 50% for sure
probably bottom 25 to' be like okay he's
mentally ill take him away that is high
level muscle dysmorphia a disassociation
from any objective reality about how
much muscle you actually have do people
over estimate or underestimate their
appearance as it relates to their
muscles uh dysmorphia is almost always
cataloged as an underestimation but but
from your experience working with people
do people think they're more jacked than
they actually are it really depends on
the individual most people that are in
gym culture that are very invested if
you catch them on their not so great
days they think they're substantially
less jacked than they really are and if
you tease it apart via conversation
they'll end up being like yeah no no I
know I'm jacked but I'm just saying like
and then it's aspirational like for my
goals I'm not as jacked as I would like
to be it's interesting because we
typically think of women I think
stereotypically in society as caring
more about their body image but I've
I've read a lot of stats lately that
suggest men care equally about their
body image but just in slightly
different ways and the about the
correlation between their perception of
their body image and their own mental
health and the link between the two sure
sure do you see a lot of that do you see
this link between Health in male body
image yes huge proportion of
psychological proclivities are genetic
the others are very individually
acquired they change through time it's
not as easy as saying upbringing or
family environment so the one consistent
thing about how you relate to the world
in your own thoughts is genetics and a
lot of the traits tend to aggregate
together so it is true to say on a
spectrum very nuanced that some people
aggregate a lot of negative
psychological traits and some people
aggregate a lot of positives and there
absolutely people everyone's a mixed bag
somewhere in between but there's a
little bit of this kind of I don't want
to use a a term for another mental a
bipolarity to the distribution right and
so a lot of people that are generally
neurotic they feel consistently uh
unsafe and unsure of themselves are
going to be also the type of people that
when they get more jacked through
lifting they're still not going to
believe that they're as jacked and
accomplished and awesome and alpha male
as they really are because they're
always like you know to use the old
Jewish joke stereotype
like I'm never going to be big and it's
like you're already big like oh I don't
know it could get it could get worse
tomorrow and a lot of people just bring
that to the table and so when you get
neurotic people jacked they don't think
they're that jacked they're always like
oh my God it's always going to end but
if you take not neurotic people and make
them jacked one week of lifting into
those people and they're like dude I'm
like do you think I should turn pro in
bodybuilding like get out of here you're
just overon
so it really depends on who's doing the
thing now cultural stuff social who's in
your circle I'll give you a good example
I have a lot of my closest friends have
no relation to Fitness whatsoever a
bunch of them are actually
neuroscientists just randomly people I
knew in college that ended up being my
friends for life and so when they assess
their muscularity relative to myself and
my bodybuilder friends they're like I'm
in terrible shape and I'm not remotely
jacked and they have such a weird
comparator population that I always
remind them like dude dude not everyone
looks like this they go to the store
they go to school they go to the bank
and they're like oh crap you're right
I'm actually the most jacked person at
the bank it's just not like Gold's Gym
where everyone's enormous so if you
happen to be in an environment let's say
you're a university student and you go
to the University gym and there's lots
of jacked people there and you're there
all the time trying to do your best you
may if you're neurotic to begin with
more neurotic start to develop a sense
that you're just not nearly as jacked as
you should be or could be or whatever
but if you like hang out at an old
people home with your grandma and
grandpa all the time you're going to
feel like Superman all the time because
holy [__] you're like you can do real
things and move furniture around and and
so then go back to that point about
weight loss if I'm trying to lose weight
what are the biggest biggest myths
around weight loss that hold people back
and inhibit them one is you have to be
perfect if I'm on my diet I'm good if
I'm off my diet not only am I bad but as
soon as I'm off my diet I have sinned
and there is no Solace for me um I a lot
of people have that falling off the
bandwagon thing where eat clean food
whatever that means diet food for weeks
and weeks and weeks they have one Kebab
they have one cheeseburger and they're
like do it that's it man I'm done
dieting I'm not a good person anymore
it's like that whole dichotomizing and
kind of a religious approach that hurts
a lot of people because in reality if
you just Eat A Cheeseburger your body's
like oh sweet like I got a little bit
more carbohydrates stored in the muscle
I recovered a little bit more my diet
fatigue is actually a little lower
because you fed me some food tomorrow
I'm back on the diet I'm making even
better gains than if I didn't have that
cheeseburger I was so exhausted and so a
lot of people have that approach
completely backwards and they're like
I'm either good or I'm bad and and
that's really tough another one is
people think that the approach to lose
weight is the same as the approach to
maintain it um this is really really
really nasty because so my wife is a uh
board-certified uh Family Med Sports Med
doctor and she does a lot of work
international Olympic teams all that
stuff
and she is looking at these formal
recommendations from the medical
literature and it's like here's the kind
of diet you need to get to lose weight
and then she was like she followed up
with some of the professionals and she's
like and so what about maintenance and
they're like uh yep what do you mean yep
what are you talking about that's not
the conversation so people think okay
I'm going to clean up my diet no more
ice cream no more no more crisps no more
Cheetos I'm gonna eat super healthy and
then when I get to the weight that I
want
I eat continuously super Health never
have ice cream again what kind of
bizarre world is it and so they'll flop
back to the other one well they'll try
for a few months after they've gotten to
the weight they like to just eat
completely super healthy clean
everything like that they lose a little
bit more weight they're exhausted
they're tired they're food focus is
driving them nuts they'll eat some ice
cream and they'll go I'm a sinner and
then ice cream ice cream cheeseburgers
cheeseburgers up they go and then they
regain all the weight so a huge myth is
the fact that yeah when you're you're
losing weight you got to pay a little
bit more attention to what you eat but
once you've gotten to that weight you
both need some time roughly every 3
months that you diet hard to lose weight
you should be taking about at least two
months at maintenance just maintaining
it so if you weigh 100 kilos iron down
to 90 after 3 months for about two or 3
months just stay at 90 eat mostly the
healthy stuff that you were but throw a
little junk in there maintenance again
is much easier than losing when
physiologically and psychologically your
diet fatigue comes down after those two
or three months you're able if you'd
like to start dieting really hard again
to get to that next goal that you have
or you just live in balance for the rest
but if we tell you like here's your diet
to make you lean and healthy and you're
like okay how long do I have to do this
and the doctor's like
forever what what am I supposed to do
I'm never I'm never allowed to have
teramis Su after dinner ever again I'm
like well probably not to that's
terrible advice and not only do medical
people too often say that most people
have that in their heads and it's it's a
very very untenable sitation one of the
big sort of narratives that I was
exposed to for most of my life about
weight loss is that 80% of its
diet what do you think about those
ratios how much of weight loss is
determined by diet versus exercise
yeah diet has a bigger effect than
exercise as a heuristic I'm very
comfortable with 8020 there are a couple
reasons for that one
is there's a constrained energy
hypothesis
it's also called ponor Paradox based on
Herman ponor work and physical
anthropology and
so basically they realize that the
amount of physical activity that humans
can do has a range but if you try to get
people to like double their physical
activity you say I'm not going to change
my diet I'm GNA work out twice as much
as the next guy your body becomes so
fatigued so rapidly and your metabolism
adjusts itself your physical activity
that's not planned exercise like how
much do you get up when someone calls
you are you still on the couch talking
to them or how much do you get up and
walk around your kitchen a bunch your
body makes all these adjustments so if
you try to really outwork a bad diet it
doesn't work and usually you just come
back to the same physical activity
because you're too exhausted to continue
and then you failed whereas with diet
you can make some dietary changes
principle based like stop eating junk
food every day and just eat two pieces
of junk food on Friday and two pieces of
junk food on Saturday just that alone is
sustainable your body as long as these
are filling Foods a lot of veggies
fruits whole grains lean meats you're
not hungry you're just like damn it I
want a bag of chips that's not a reason
that is mostly psychological it's not
physiological and thus dieting is just
able to take bigger chunks out of your
calorie balance equation without
completely destroying it that has limits
as well you can't D it forever so you
have to take it in chunks another thing
is this in order
to burn a lot of calories to lose a lot
of weight you got to do some serious
work the average person will burn
something like 100 to 150 calories per
mile
run oh my God you start thinking about
it like a doughnut has 300 calories how
fast Stephen can you eat a doughnut if I
time
you 5 Seconds five no problem boom you
going to run three miles after each
donut it's insane so taking your diet
cleaning it up reducing the junk
reducing the calories is not that hard
but if you try to fight off the nasty
extra junk food calories you're taking
in with exercise it's kind of like a
three to one fight you you eat two
Donuts at your work function after work
you got six miles to run that day nobody
doing that and that's why diet is such a
huge factor it's so easy to do quote
unquote damage with it and it's much
easier to take control of it versus
exercise the boundary layers are just
smaller and what you would have to do to
fight the bad diet is just grotesquely
large and outside of those boundary
layers I think this a lot because I
think people typically assume that the
way to lose weight is to go do a run
yeah that's typically you know you'll
see people in the gym and if you ask
someone why they're on the running
machine they'll probably say I'm trying
to lose some weight
yeah it helps a little
bit but if you run and you burn 200
calories extra per day 3 days per week
then is 600 extra calories you're
burning through the week that's good
stuff you can lose some decent weight
like that are you just going to be more
hungry though afterwards uh typically
exercise does not dependably increase
your hunger in most people so uh uh
depending on the context in the
individual it's not a Dependable thing
to say that doing more exercise
necessarily makes you more hungry which
is kind of cool because usually you're
not really any more hungry and if you
stick consistently exercise but you
control your diet you're good to go
however is there a psychological
component to that where because done the
run I now feel like I deserve it oh yeah
that's huge and some people do have a
hunger response but what you put in your
body after that could be really healthy
stuff that doesn't have a ton of
calories is really filling or it could
be like we're done running pizza and
beer and then that's really bad news but
real quick so let's say you're burning
600 calories extra per week by running
two miles at a time or whatever or
whatever you run an extra four miles per
week right 600 calories per week okay
what is that well to burn a pound of
body fat you need need to get 3500
calories per week out of your diet or do
3500 extra calories of activity per week
600s a drop and the bucket to that
you'll never notice I mean yeah after a
year you'll lose like two or three
pounds or five pounds or whatever nobody
thinks in terms like that but if they
were to Simply alter their diet and keep
training to keep the calorie burn at a
moderate to high level but take food out
of their diet especially through junk
food the total calorie snc deficit they
can make for themselves is now in the
hundreds of calories per day now you're
losing a pound of fat every week now
you're having big results is there a
preference between doing cardio or
strength as it relates to long-term
weight loss because I'm thinking if I've
got more muscles then surely my body's
going to need more it's going to burn
more calories just by a small margin
almost unnoticeable so your your body
versus my body you're not burning more
calories I how much do you weigh um 90 I
don't even know it in pounds it's about
92 kilg okay solid so I currently weigh
which about 98 kilogram 202 pounds so
202 so I weigh like 216 to 220 right now
so we weigh not too far off you not too
far off so even though I have
considerably more muscle in your opinion
my in my very biased opin that um no
dismorphia here uh I would be burning a
teen bit more fat or more calories per
day because of my higher muscle mass but
it's mostly my absolutely higher weight
so for example the people in the world
that burn the most calories and need the
most calories to sustain their body
weight are the fattest people in the
world that like lady that weighs 800
900,000 pounds like just to keep her the
same size it's 15,000 calories a day W
and if it was all muscle and no fat
somehow she was a th000 pounds of musle
which would be sweet to look at she
would be burning like maybe 6 16,000
calories per day instead of 15 and
probably even that's an exaggeration
muscle mass doesn't help you burn tons
of calories that's not what it's there
for it is incredibly good for your
health it is incredibly good for how you
look those things by itself make muscle
mass an awesome thing to do but it is
neither true to say that cardio reliably
over the long term Burns lots of weight
off and it is not true to say that
gaining lots of muscle Burns lots of
weight off what is really really
critical is do you have a
well-controlled nutritious diet and do
you have an average moderate to high
level of daily physical activity dancing
and swimming and running and having fun
and chasing your kids if you're on the
higher end of activity not psychotically
high to where you get super tired just
not being a total SL like slouch and
making sure you're aware of your body
when your diet that's what really pays
these massive dividends in long-term
weight control it's not like if I put on
a ton of muscle that's great for
everything else it makes you super
healthy it makes you look really awesome
it gives you the ability to like I don't
know like do real world stuff uh defend
yourself things like that that's what
muscle is there for it's not the
greatest like calorie sink in the world
I wish it was I'd beat cheeseburger
right now so in terms of
supplements are there any supplements
you suggest that I take if my goal is to
lose weight but also to gain muscle mass
for the average
person no there's no supplements I mean
creatine creatine will not help with
weight loss and for most people it'll
temporarily gain you about two kilos of
body weight because it attracts body
water into the muscle it's a cool look
because it makes I'm on Creatine right
now can you tell mhm yeah really all
right so creatine doesn't help you lose
weight in any meaningful extent so I'm
aware of no over-the-counter supplements
that simultaneously help you burn fat
and gain muscle there are supplements
that are not over the counter that do
that quite well but what what if I'm
just trying to gain muscle then what
supplements what supplements would you
recommend the average person to be
taking really regardless of I guess
goals if their goal is to be a little
bit more lean with their muscle mass if
their goal is to build muscle is it
different types of supplements you'd
suggest or creatine Works to build
muscle it's got awesome cognitive
benefits it's just healthy for you and
it's great so five grams per day for
most people of creatine monohydrate
super awesome have you got to load
creatine I remember when I used to load
creatine that's basically like a
corporate scam that's just trying to get
you to consume more creatine so you buy
it more yeah after if you load your
creatine which is like taking 20 grams
per day for a few days you get to
intramuscular creatine stores that are
optimal like in four or five days if you
don't load creatine you get there in
like s to 10 days because you're taking
creatine either for months or for life
it's just a moot point so creatine
loading is a gigantic waste of time in
almost every case Okay so creatine works
whey protein casan protein can be an
excellent way to conveniently get
protein so they're more like Foods
rather than supplements those are
totally cool but not
mandatory if you talk to me like you are
now for just several hours at a time
let's say we're sitting on a plane
together and you're like I'm just a guy
who's trying to get like a little bit
more this a little that what supplements
do I need to take is the
wrong time to ask that the time to ask
that is like I want to take a run at a
natural bodybuilding show what
supplements do I need okay then they pay
some dividends that are worth noting but
supplements are just not in the
conversation for important things that
health conscious people should have in
even in their top 10 of important things
need to do the top 10 important things
are like getting adequate sleep managing
your stress really well consistently
lifting weights consistently doing a
high level of physical activity etc etc
etc those are the big rocks not
supplements supplements are insanely
overrated as a general rule this next
challenge is offered in partnership with
with whoop does the idea of waking up
with more energy a clearer mind and a
feeling of control appeal to you if it
does I want you to join me this sober
October I stopped drinking a while ago
now and it was largely because of whoop
time and time again I watched my heart
rate variability drop to like 40 after
having a drink even one or two glasses
of wine when it would otherwise sit
nearer to 150 the only other times it
would drop this slow was when I was sick
or when I was stressed information
enables us to make more informed choices
and seeing this led me to make a change
in my life so if you're a member of
whoop look out for whoop sober October
challenge in the app and if you haven't
joined yet head over to join. woop.com
CEO to start your free trial that's
join. woop.com
CEO and get ready for your life to
change what about steroids they're great
what am I allowed to say that what what
what are steroids and you you take
steroids mhm um do you take steroids all
the time and mhm what is the impact so
say if you weren't taking steroids how
different would you look I know this
because I I used to not take steroids
and when I wasn't taking
steroids I uh weighed about at at a body
fat similar to this uh I would have to
weigh probably
a80 to 190 lb more like 180
and and this kind of body fat level I
currently weigh uh 216 lbs because I'm
on a moderate amount of steroids a few
weeks ago actually earlier last week I
was on higher amounts of steroids and
with the same level of body fat I
weighed 227 pounds so we're talking
about 30 40 pounds of muscle tissue
difference between steroids and not
steroids have you got a picture of
before and after before when you didn't
use steroids and you trained and then
after yeah it's got to be somewhere
we'll try and get it just just just for
visual cont sure sure sure you said
they're great I was kidding oh right
they're great for putting on muscle if
you want to jettison your
long-term Health and Longevity to some
extent yes and your current
psychological stuff is someone that's
never done it give me a window into
what' you do you inject it somewhere you
can take steroids orally through pills
or you can inject it into musle
so uh usually you would inject it into
your quads a lot of people do their
shoulders and some people if they're
flexible enough do their glutes and how
quickly do you notice a difference and
how big is the the difference just to
give me sort of like your as far as
jackness is concerned yeah so if I start
taking steroids
now yeah how how long would it be before
I notice the difference and how extreme
would the difference be in your opinion
visually after a few months he would be
like oh wow okay this is some other [__]
after after a week or two you'd be like
I don't I don't know my workouts feel
pretty good uh psychologically if you're
especially introspective and perceptive
and you're sensitive to the
psychological side effects which I'm
greatly sensitive to um I notice in 30
minutes of taking steroids and would I
if I did the same exact workout but took
steroids would I get different results
or would I have to ramp up the workout
that I'm doing to see those different
results both okay if you have the same
workout and you take plenty of steroids
you can literally double your muscle
gain from that workout if you understand
that steroids also allow you to recover
faster and better and more completely
you can take your workout and magnify it
more sets Etc more sessions per week and
then you would grow like two and a half
times as much muscle sounds exciting but
there's always a downside for these
things in life isn't there are a few
downsides yes what are the downsides
that no one's talking about that no
one's talking about so there's cosmetic
down sides you get an increase in body
hair growth this is especially profound
if you're female but if you're a male
that's a thing I have hair that grows on
my ears I have hair that grows on the
outside of my nose I have to shave the
front of my nose now a lot of that's
just be being a Russian Jew and this
hair just grows out of our eyeballs but
[__] happens you get pimples you get
stuff like that over the longer term you
get an A substantially increased risk of
heart disease if you're smart you take
blood pressure drugs to counteract the
blood pressure increase if if you're
dumb you take it on the chin and you
have a high probability much higher of
kidney failure later in your life and
losing your limbs and your vision and
all that good stuff that comes with that
there is an increased probability or
severity of cancer uh steroids increase
the probability of damn near every
disease kind of central systemic disease
that you can have but that usually
happens much later and so while you're
on them you deal with a cosmetic side
effects increased probability of
balding uh and the psychological side
effects which are highly unpleasant I
can get into in a bit if you're a
teenager there's an entire class of
steroids that close your growth plates
early so if you're under the age of
definitely 22 as a male and you take
steroids there's a very good chance you
will never reach the adult height you
were supposed to reach if you just let
nature do the thing so when teenagers
take steroids I this almost always
categorically a super super terrible
idea also they're not intelligent enough
uh yet some teenagers are very smart
they're not wise enough yet to be able
to make that trade-off appropriately mhm
and so that's a huge sort of different
topic but um the psychological side
effects are a lot of times the things
that are the approximately most
displeasing part of taking steroids some
people like them but they're they're
also a mixed bag tell me about the
before we get on to the psychological
effects what about liido because I've
heard all kinds of things I've heard it
shrinks your balls your Willie something
like half of all people will experience
testicular shrinkage while using
steroids your boy got lucky my shit's
all the same size a lot of people
roughly half will experience a decrease
in ejaculate volume and a profound
decrease in fertility that does not mean
you're not infertile I know many people
I know many people's children that were
fathered when the people were on steroid
so some people are like ah I'm on gear I
could just bang away and nothing happens
like that's not
true uh steroids have never been shown
to uh change the size of your Willie uh
there is no mechanism by which really
they can do that um so that's not a
problem but steroids depending on the
steroids you take depending on your own
individual biology depending on the
ancillary drugs that you take along with
it uh steroids can either have no real
effect on your libido have a profoundly
upregulating effect on libido or like
hunger like you would not believe and
for other people you get um an increase
in libido but some steroids for example
decad durabolin and some people it's a
type of steroid radically escalates your
labino you turn in just as hungry and at
the same time gives you in many cases
Dependable um uh inability to uh sustain
an erection so erectile dysfunction risk
goes up a lot that's a real big problem
because like you want it but it's not
around it's not around for the picking
there so there's all that kind of stuff
plays plays a huge role and a lot of the
other side effects are increases in
anxiety increases in aggression um
increases in disagreeableness and
probability of Confrontation steroids
have been shown decently well this isn't
super confirmed to at least proximately
while you're taking them substantially
reduce your fluid intelligence and uh
they may in the long term reduce your
overall intelligence but it seems that
if you stop taking them you get most if
not all of that back but maybe not all
of them so they do make you dumber as a
as a general heuristic that's probably
true of those psychological implications
which ones have you suffered with the
most decrease in fluid intelligence for
sure radical increases in anxiety
radical increases in aggression um I
pride myself on never losing my cool
I've never screamed at anyone I've never
gotten physical with anyone but the
ideas in my head that tell me to do
things tell me to do unspeakable things
like what they're
unspeakable I'd have to speak them you
really want to know
M
um I'm also [__] weird so just
remember that no we all bit weird most
people uh probably don't have this
severity
but I'll read a comment on social media
directed at me I guess about me um and
it's from like you know nameless
faceless profile and I begin to
fantasize about what it would be like
and how
much Sublime pleasure I would
receive
in uh hurting that person at a deep
physical and emotional
level uh badly hurting them in such a
way that they're never going to walk
right again and they're always going to
remember me and how they dared to cross
me do you know what honor culture is no
like the idea that like in the hood you
step on someone's like a gang member's
Nikes and he just blasts you away and
goes to jail for 20 years over what
steroids the honor culture comes from
maleness it comes from testosterone and
all brain structures of course but the
more testosterone and steroids are all
testosterone like molecules if you have
10 times the testosterone like action
affecting your brain your proclivity to
falling into honor culture like
behavioral patterns and thought patterns
increases to an enormous extent so tend
to take things that are not meant in any
poor way as a fronts if they're actually
meant as a fronts you tend to
catastrophize them in your head and like
this is the thing like I'll be brushing
my teeth in the morning in the shower
and like thinking about people in my
life that have wronged me I've never
been wrong in any real serious way and
I'll just be like
those uncontrollable fantasies of rage
and aggression and righteous anger and
revenge I hate that
like as a philosophical minded person I
just want to hug everyone in the world
right now I'm on not so high levels of
steroids I'm just man I make jokes with
every I'll start conversation with
random people in the street no problem
and so when these thoughts consistently
enter my mind on higher doses I'm just
like oh why and I'm never like I should
be feeling like this I'm like this is
really annoying and really terrible so
if there are all of
these physiological and psychological
implications which you know you said it
basically increases your chances with
all of the major diseases from card
cardiovascular diseases to cancers to um
other diseases but then also there's
this ongoing psychological consequence
of taking
steroids what's the
point that's a good
question recently I've
taken a probably several year backseat
away from competitive
bodybuilding precisely because I have a
lot of good things going on in my life
and I'm going to need my brain and my um
more fluid civility to deal with them
best uh and for a couple of other
reasons so right now is an interesting
time to ask me why I do it because I'm
kind of like winding that down big time
but um the real reason is uh one of the
reasons that I started steroids is I was
drug- free for a long time and I was
starting to become kind of an educator
in Fitness a promogator of
opinion and a lot of the people who were
in the industry at the time this is not
as true anymore now drug-free
bodybuilding and fitness is exploding
which is a beautiful wonderful thing but
back when uh Nick and I came up to be
relevant in the fitness industry you
sort of had to be like super super Jack
and super super Le it's nothing we were
going to accomplish drug free so we were
like this is where the road leads to
being taken seriously as a a thinker in
the space let's do it another thing is
um I really like like being or at least
for a long time liked being enormous and
ripped why and um just like
a like you ever see how a four-year-old
looks at like a garbage truck or a tank
or an airplane like just that why it's
as simple as that biology and I'm at the
extreme end of masculinity brain wise to
begin with and so you see a movie where
like the Hulk rips off an airplane wing
and throws it some people be like whoa
some people are like I hate this movie
and some people are like
oh my God I want to just be that that
whole thing why I want that it just
feels good but you know why because have
you got any hypothesis as to why why you
versus someone else because the average
person doesn't have that feeling so have
you have you been able to figure out in
hindsight why you were so taken by being
big I have a few ideas I'll I'll I'll
cavey out this idea with the following
um retrospective analysis of why do
things is almost always grotesquely
flawed most of why we do things is a
combination of variables we don't
understand and genetics and so like the
whole life story arc well it all started
when a teacher in the third grade like
that's [__] that's a backwards
justification you made up so the
following statements are backwards
justifications I'm making up as just
tentative very not not sure hypotheses
um here's a fun story this will be fun
um when I was uh small uh young my dad
would wrestle with me a lot and um he
would always uh let me win in the end he
was great he's a great person and he
would always tell me that I was strong
and capable and then uh in
like end of elementary school all the
way through the beginning of high school
I was bullied honestly like literally a
few times I think I was just the wrong
person to bully because that very
temporary state of disenfranchisement
and
powerlessness
um I'm never going to be bullied again
to put to put it simply I wish I was
logical enough that when like if if I
was getting robbed by someone at knife
point or not even knife point just like
just a guy tried to be like hey man get
out of my way
no I said get out of my way I'm going to
die here before I move out of your way
you either going to treat me with
respect or one of us is either going to
jail or the morg or the hospital
mhm it's a terrible thing to think it's
stupid beyond belief just be like sir my
apologies please keep going but what
were you bulled
for nothing nothing just kid just wanted
to bully people
we want to understand the con what was
going through your brain at the time
like what you were thinking in that
moment because I think we can all think
back to well too unfortunately too many
people can think back to a time when
they were bullied in some way whether it
was a day or whether it was something
that was a bit more prolonged you know
and it be and they started to it started
to embody that sort of pain and shame
and that feeling of I'm different from
these other kids some of my best friends
have talked you know they've been to
therapy and their therapists have I
think figured out through some of that
retrospective analysis which obv
obviously a lot of the time isn't
accurate that much of their adult
Behavior today correlates back to an
early experience in such a way where
they were made to feel a certain way in
that social environment where we're so
sort of formative yeah how did it make
you feel I felt scared and I felt like I
um wasn't brave enough to stand up for
myself later I began standing up for
myself and that felt very nice but it I
felt like I was out of control and a
part of my brain that I didn't consent
to made me frown and dipped my head down
for me it was almost like musculature
and my neck just
deactivated it it's a ancestral uh
mechanism that everyone has uh kids all
the way up through teenage hood and
adulthood sort themselves male children
into dominance hierarchies it's just the
dominance hierarchy sorting itself and
someone confronted me and I
automatically sorted myself beneath them
I felt beneath someone I felt weaker
more inferior less apt less capable less
confident less strong and I didn't even
have consent to it it's not something I
chose I was a go this kid will beat me
up I better not it was totally uh a
subconscious behavior and looking back
on it I did not enjoy how that made me
feel do you remember a specific day
where a specific thing happened because
I can think back to a spe a couple of
specific days when I was younger that I
think shaped me in that regard where I
was pretty much the only black person in
the school I remember an evening where
this particular kid called Sam had like
cornered me and called me the nword and
everyone was there and you know I'll
never forget those days they're like
etched into your mind as you know
Unforgettable memories of pain of Shame
of that that feeling MH do do you have
those a particular day yeah sure could
you share that with
me this is getting deep
huh
um I have a a few
incidents one probably stands out the
most so it was a kid named Darren and he
was
black
um almost certainly
fatherless
um preder naturally physically developed
for his age he was 10 so was
I we were just wrestling I wrestled with
everyone he beat me in wrestling he was
the only person I believe to beat me in
wrestling my whole childhood cuz like he
was like a 14-year-old kid in great
shape and I was a 10-year-old
kid
and he beat me in wrestling and that was
cordial cuz like it just is wrestling
but he had braces I think and he cut
himself while wrestling with me and he
was bleeding out of his
mouth and then he got really upset about
that and he like kind of stood over me
and he was like like you know you little
this and that like you did this to me
like I'm going to f you up and all this
other stuff and that's when that
mechanism switched when he did that to
me my whole perspective on the world
changed for years I was like a confident
happy kid and then after that for four
or five years maybe longer all of my
confidence drained out I became
introverted I am not naturally
introverted and
um that his presence
alone uh reminded me that I need to keep
my head down and otherwise I get real
scared and I didn't want to be scared
and so that's how that worked and it
wasn't like he got something like your
[__] is racial that's deep Bro my shit's
not deep at all it's just two kids and
one of them punked it out I was just the
wrong person for that to happen to and I
remember fantasizing when I was in like
sixth grade I think like a year later
like wouldn't it be great if I brought a
baseball bat to school
and just broke his legs and just kept
hitting his legs to where he'd never
walk right ever again cuz he wronged me
that bad I felt that deep and true I'm
going to keep the statement as
contextual as I can with full
understanding of respect for the gravity
of what I'm seeing when the Coline
people did what they did I thought it
was egregious and terrible I also
understood how you could be pushed to do
that now in their particular case I
don't even know how they were pushed or
whatever but enough bullying make you
consider doing terrible things to regain
your honor and so that was probably like
the most preent I was bullied in other
situations again like I might have been
bullied three or four times my whole
life but it just it just did not sit
well with me at all for a long time it
changed how I expressed myself to the
world and even right now as I talk to
you I'm getting pretty emotional I say
like if I see that guy again in real
life if he's even around
I have a brown belt in Jiu-Jitsu now I'm
almost certainly bigger and stronger
than
him is he safe around
me probably can I guarantee his safety
if he brings it up no if he watches this
and hits me up and goes hi I got you
little [__] if I see him in real life I
might take something from him Medical
Science can't give him back within the
next five or 10 years what a terrible
idea I'd go to jail I have a lot of
really good things going for me it would
be wrong in every single way it wouldn't
even be ethical because he never like
beat the crap out of me or anything like
that it was that like he brutalized me
and my God like I'm going to [__]
someone over some [__] childhood he
also Steph he was 10 the gravity of How
Deeply it feels to me even right now at
age 40 he like man yeah that [__]
definitely meant something it's
interesting because um I think for the
first I'm 31 now so I think for the
first 27 years of my life if you'd asked
me why I do what I do I would have in
hindsight probably told you a story that
sounds a little bit heroic I I have this
drive and I have this motivation and I
had this goal and I went after it and it
was all like self- agency and all that
stuff but the more and more I've learned
about I think psychology generally and
how humans as I often say are sometimes
driven and they're dragged and it's hard
to tell the difference M like whether
something is drive or whether it's like
you're being dragged MH um compulsion
like compulsion that you just can't
explain um because of maybe a trauma or
an experience you you went through or
maybe the the household you grew up in I
think I'm I'm leaning more now towards
the dragged side of things in most areas
of my life especially where I exhibit
atypical Behavior like what like a for
the fact that I work like seven days a
week and I can just and I'm I've always
been absolutely obsessed with like
achievement and success so why do you
think that is because I think I I grew
up in a context where the thing that
invalidated me was that like we were the
poor
family that didn't have things and I was
black in an all white area um and I was
just full of Shame growing up and I
think I saw the the medicine to the to
the shame as being material success it
was the thing that I lied cheated and
stole to try and Achieve and you know
it's been my orientation for my whole
life I think deep within me is this this
story that success and material success
and all those things make me enough MH
and I I didn't feel like inside yeah and
I didn't feel like I was enough and as
much as I'm aware of that now it doesn't
mean that it's going to
stop did it so it didn't do you feel
like you're enough well it's interesting
because if you ask me do I feel like I'm
enough I'd say yes like I'm very
comfortable with who I am like I think I
have somewhat of an accurate reflection
of of who I am to some degree but I'm
but then I also I contrast that with the
fact that why am I still just like
obsessively driving towards these ever
bigger goals in a way that's really
really atypical like not average person
you know and why does it matter so much
to me you know that's where I go okay
there's something different in my wiring
it's still an element this sort of
proving my worth to myself or you know
proving to the kids back on the
playground that you know they should
respect me in some way or whatever yeah
and it's complicated and I say this not
because it sound makes me sound great
because it certainly doesn't I just say
it because I really believe that more
honest I can be with myself the closer I
can get to everything that I want oh
sure you know like the closer I can get
to holding the steering wheel not being
dragged with with a rope at the back of
the car I'm trying to hold this steering
wheel in my life and that starts with
like an honest self self-awareness and
one that honestly has only come
from uh being more and more confident
and caring less about what people think
like I wouldn't have said this on camera
there's like millions of people probably
listening right now I wouldn't have said
these things about myself it sounds icky
oh I've never told this buling story to
anyone but a few people I was like when
you brought it up like tell me about
when you were bullied in my head I was
like holy [__] all right like this is
where this goes well I just think it's
everyone I've met it's not you're not
you're the same as everyone I've met in
that regard probably if I had to write
that fake backstory Arc explaining My
Life The Bullying thing is like kind of
a little bit minor I have a really
gnarly story about having really severe
attention deficit disorder when I was
younger while at the same time growing
up in an ashkanazi jewish family for
ashkanazi Jewish Russian immigrants to
the US you were either good at school or
you were worthless and it's not just my
parents thought that they didn't really
think that at a deep level they didn't
believe it at a surface level I thought
that you can't make fun of someone for
being fat if they're cool with being fat
they're like yeah I'm [__] big hell
yeah and you're like it didn't work but
if they believe that being fat is
terrible you can be like hey uh how much
do you weigh and that's it everything
changes so for
me I believed I had a
destiny to be at least competent at
school and up until I was 14 I was like
in contention for being the worst
student at any single school I attended
at any single time and the Bittersweet
element was my dad is a PhD in
mathematical modeling of atmospheric
physical phenomena and my mom was a a
translator of the Russian language or
translator English to Russian and got a
master's degree in social work in our
second language in America a few years
after we got in that's the Legacy I'm
dealing with and like I can't do math
problems three grades younger than the
kids I I got held back in school a grade
and so I took that not so well and so
later because I was medicated uh for
attention deficit it was a revelatory
experience as I came up and sort of grew
into the idea that was actually fairly
intelligent um I had something to prove
and it's getting better now because I've
taken enough IQ tests and you can only
write so many books and be on so many
podcasts until people are like you're
pretty smart and you you got to start
believing it unless you're totally
irrational at some point that sinks in
so one thing I will say is is there are
ways of dealing with demons and
insufficiencies that you've developed
through your childhood some of them are
just having a real deep personal journey
in your own head consistently
reinforcing good attitudes not
reinforcing the bad ones otherwi are
talking to friends family other ones are
therapy which is excellent for this but
I got to tell you Stephen I'm not sure
if this is true but there's got to be
something to proving the opposite is
true through to doing it all to getting
I don't know the top or whatever but to
like no one in the right mind with this
point be like this guy is below average
intelligence that would be Preposterous
to say I've uh taken the Ravens Advanced
Progressive matrices test and I pegged
at scale high so I get every single
question right and so my IQ is above 160
we don't know how high because they
don't do standardized IQ tests above
that you do that enough times you enough
PHD programs enough book enough teaching
Awards enough authorship enough all the
stuff enough millions and app designs
and all the stuff and dealing with
otherwise really smart people and they
walk away being like [__] that guy's
real smart enough of
that makes you swim in a warm
comfortable sea that heals you in a way
that maybe therapy can but godamn
there's something to just do in the
[__] thing you take a skinny little
kid who's bullied you make a Muhammad
Ali champion of the world enough title
fights later you like hey Muhammad Ali
what you going do about this he doesn't
even Flinch come at me so yeah it's nice
to say and I think it's true that
therapy and self-care and all these
things can heal the
soul there's something about overcoming
and becoming superlative to that thing
you used to
fear that might heal your soul to a huge
extent I think maybe I've witnessed that
again maybe this is all just make belief
it sounds real nice no I I completely
agree and it's perfectly what I've
experienced in my own life and as you
were speaking I was was thinking it's
just so clear to me that when you're
young you get
evidence you get like a stack of
evidence about who you are and what the
world is and what you then have done for
the next 10 20 30 years is to counteract
that evidence with new evidence I think
about it like a library I think
everything that I went through and you
went through when you were younger just
added like one book to this shelf and
the interesting context of the library
is those books are both in informative
they're both you know non-fiction books
but they're also fiction books and
they're also instruction manuals for
what you'll do in the future if you
think about those first 18 years of your
life what you did is you filled this
Library full of in books stories self
stories and this library that you've
you've collected is just a bunch of
stories that you believe about yourself
now if you want to change some of these
stories unfortunately you have to get
new books yes so what you did in your
life is you pursued um hard things that
would put new books on the shelf and
when a new book comes on the shelf that
counteracts another one you have to take
the old one off but you can't you can't
just sit around willing the it's it's as
you say as an I've experienced in my
life the only way I can put books up
there is to go and get first party
evidence with my own eyes that something
else is true and not just once over and
over over depending on how stubborn the
existing for sure and if they're real
stubborn here here's my question to you
do you think that childhood
experiences build the kind of books that
are hard back lord of the ranks type of
shits whereas adult experiences that
completely countervail a childhood
experiences are like little magazine you
read out a plane I got so in the analogy
when you're a child you put books on the
Shelf very quickly they they're all very
cheap books because there's nothing on
the Shelf so you're just grabbing your
mom says uh pigs can fly on the Shelf as
you get older actually because there's
so many books on the Shelf already and
so if I just focus on this analogy of
pigs flying there's already a book about
Aviation on the Shelf M which means it's
harder to believe that pigs can fly
there's a book already about animals and
their Anatomy so you can't add a new one
because there so many counteracting ones
already so this is why they often say
that young kids adopt you know you can't
teach an old dog new tricks because
there's so much existing evidence there
of something else being true so kids
throw them on the Shelf without much
interrogation because there's less
counteracting books there already
whereas adults they take a little bit
more time to add a new one because
they've got six other books which might
tell a different story yeah and so this
is you know we think about neuroscience
and neuroplasticity it becomes a little
bit harder sometimes for adults to I
mean I had a neuroscientist here
yesterday saying this to me that it
becomes after you get to pass to 25
years old neuroplasticity becomes a
little bit more stubborn it's still
possible up until you die but it's a
little bit more stubborn so you just
need more reinforcement you need more
reinforcement more evidence more
repetitions and he he described it as
more focus more focus on the thing what
one thing that I found maybe is helpful
is my my wife is similar to me she's
like an insane super gold driven
psychotic person and we have real
trouble taking a step back and telling
ourselves like man we're doing pretty
well so every now and again like
evenings and weekends especially
weekends we'll do some like sounds super
lame but gratefulness uh discussion lame
at all uh depending on who you talked I
guess to my old childh bullies that's
lame but um you know it's really weird
to say some of these things out loud to
yourself and uh there's some resistance
especially early um admitting to
yourself like uh I I won I won I won I
won I did the thing maybe it doesn't
work quite that simply but I think it
it's good to try because it's a really
weird thing to go and be 60 years old
and look back on your life and someone's
like so what have you accomplished like
ah not much it kind of ain't [__] like
I've seen you on book covers like right
oh that's right okay so I accomplished a
lot but I don't feel like I have how
dare you rob yourself of being able to s
in that beautiful warm sea of
self-actualization I think it's worth it
for people to focus when you do good let
yourself bask in that glow get your time
Under the
Sun amen and it's all about subjective
progress It's all about like this I was
going to do a post last night I was
thinking like so many people spend their
lives I was just I was scrolling through
Instagram and I was I wrote the post and
I just didn't post it but so I noticed
that so many people go through their
lives like looking for an enemy like
looking for the person or the system or
the government or the political party
that's currently wronging them and they
commit their whole life to just this
this focus of who's wronging me and I
need to point them out and call them out
and scream at them and I've never I've
never fallen into that trap but um I do
have a competition with myself and I
feel like that's very healthy because
what I'm actually looking for in myself
is some form of progress whether it's
how I show up or with my my fitness or
with my muscles or whatever this
constant um search for progress in
myself and there when I do discover
progress
I can celebrate it and I can have that
gratitude we talked about and so
anyone's progress whether it's when I
went from being a university Dropout to
getting my first investor that is like
oh my God and it's only in hindsight and
with some aging wisdom that I start to
realize that those moments were so
unbelievably important they're so
motivational identifying your progress
and I've done there's two kind of data
points that I've really um sha a light
on this for me is one of them was Sir
David bford who took the British cycling
team from being down and out and
depressed to the greatest team of all
time winning all the gold medals and he
said yes the marginal gains thing that
he's known for that's in the front
chapter of atomic habits was key but
actually he said to me he went when you
can get a group of people or a person to
feel like they're going somewhere
because they have a sense of progress he
that's what made us um stay in the bike
shop till 2: a.m. in the morning and I
read another study from Harvard Business
Review where they ask people in there in
to keep work diaries and then at the end
of the study they said point at the day
where you had your best day in work and
people always pointed in their work
diaries to a day where there was a
feeling of subjective progress even
small yes and that makes you motivated
you feel like you are going somewhere
which means you you're more likely to do
it so gratitude serves a happiness um
role but also just a motivational one we
have a closing tradition on this podcast
where the last guest leaves a question
for the next guest not knowing who
they're going to leave it for and the
question that has been left for you oh
crap what is the
most meaningful dream
brackets
nightmare you've ever had and
why I don't know if this is the most
meaningful
dream
um
but Jesus Christ I'm really gonna say
this
fine
[Music]
um as I was when I was a young adult I
was starting to experience success with
the opposite sex and I just did not ever
experience that when I was younger or
already of age but younger it's just
probably like a bit of a hangup you know
for most people it's kind of like when
you're not getting and you feel kind of
out of it and when I started
experiencing success with
women my dreams at night changed and one
of them was uh go the following dream
has nothing to do with females and sex
but it had to do with power and it had
to do with um an ability that you can I
ran out of my childhood home into the
street and
um I uh it wasn't the street anymore it
was just a black empty void and it
became a lucid dream so I kind of knew a
little bit that it was a dream it was
like oh I'm going to do cool Dragon Ball
Z stuff you know what Dragon Ball Z is
the anime show and I opened up my hand
and I wanted to make a fireball and I
made an energy ball that was like a
singular size but it was made of
people's
screams it was
like and then I woke up and I was like
that was so cool not victim screams just
Viking screams and I was like that is
the coolest [__] and I had multiple
other dreams in my young adult life
after success as a woman which were
dreams of power and I was like God damn
if I can have those dreams every night
it'll be super
happy that's the most uh interesting
dream I've ever heard about following
someone losing their virginity I didn't
say I lost my get out of here I still
haven't lost my virginity I've been a
good
person Dr Mike thank you so much for
your your wisdom and your um your
information and all the work that you've
done in your life because it's formed a
wonderfully important perspective on a
subject that so many people struggle
with I'm going to ask you I'm going to
leave you with my with my last question
which is what is the most important
thing that we didn't talk about today as
it relates to the subject matter of
getting in shap shape building muscle
that we should have talked about is
there anything we left off the
table there's a lot to this so we left a
lot out um I have a lot more to say
about body dysmorphia and how people do
relate to their bodies and how they
maybe shouldn't or try to weave their
thoughts away from various ideas and how
maybe they should try to relate to their
bodies better and it's a convers I love
to have I just don't ever get asked
about it super often so I think that in
in body dysmorphia in general in
self-esteem as it relates to bodies of
uh guys that grew up too skinny of girls
that grew up too fat I think a
combination of getting the body that you
want soaking in the Sun and really being
like I'm the hot girl now this is really
happening and how to relate to your body
there's a plethora of Wonderful ation
around that that um if I had a time
machine i' go back and interrupt you and
just be like let's talk about that
instead maybe we can sa that for another
time sure Dr Mike thank you so much
where do people find you your YouTube
channel is incredible so I'll link that
below just YouTube Everything links off
of YouTube and you've got your app as
well which people can go and check out
links off of YouTube as well links off
YouTube two apps okay so if I go to your
YouTube channel I can find everything
boom great my Dr Mike thank you so much
huge honor and pleasure thank you so
much every single time you eat you have
an opportunity to improve your health
and that's why I love Zoe because Zoe
helps me to make the smartest food
choices for me and my body and as you
guys will know by now Zoe is the sponsor
of this podcast and I'm an investor in
the company and if you haven't tried Zoe
I highly recommend you do because Zoe
combines My Health Data with Zoe's
worldclass science and using those two
things Zoe guides me to Better Health
every single time I make a food choice
and eat which means that I have more
energy better sleep better mood and less
hungry and the most important thing is
Zoe actually works it's backed by their
recent clinical trial something called
the method study which is the gold
standard of scientific research I
started Zoe just over a year ago now and
I've been able to track my progress week
after week so I can learn how to be even
smarter the following week and if you
haven't joined Zoe yet I'm giving you
10% off when you join Zoe now just use
the code ce10 at checkout isn't this
cool every single conversation I have
here on the DI CEO at the very end of it
you'll know I asked the guest to leave a
question in the Diary of a CEO and what
we've done is we' turned every single
question written in the Diary of a CEO
into these conversation cards that you
can play at home so you've got every
guest we've ever had their question and
on the back of it if you scan that QR
code you get to watch the person who
answered that question we're finally
revealing all of the questions and the
people that answered the question the
brand new version 2 updated conversation
cards are out right now at Theon
conversation cards.com they've sold out
twice instantaneously so if you are
interested in getting hold of some
limited edition conversation cards I
really really recommend acting quickly
[Music]
oh